---
title: "Preparation of Functional Silica Using a Bioinspired Method"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2018-jove
excerpt: 'Detailed methods paper of bioinspired silica synthesis and biomolecule encapsulation therein.'
date: 2018-08-01
venue: 'Journal of Visualized Experiments'
paperurl: 'https://dx.doi.org/10.3791/57730'
citation: 'J. R. H. Manning, T.W.S Yip, A. Centi, M. Jorge, and S.V. Patwardhan, “An eco-friendly, tunable and scalable method for producing porous functional nanomaterials designed using molecular interactions,” _ChemSusChem_, 2017 (10), 1683'
---
The goal of the protocols described herein is to synthesize bioinspired silica materials, perform enzyme encapsulation therein, and partially or totally purify the same by acid elution. By combining sodium silicate with a polyfunctional bioinspired additive, silica is rapidly formed at ambient conditions upon neutralization.

The effect of neutralization rate and biomolecule addition point on silica yield are investigated, and biomolecule immobilization efficiency is reported for varying addition point. In contrast to other porous silica synthesis methods, it is shown that the mild conditions required for bioinspired silica synthesis are fully compatible with the encapsulation of delicate biomolecules. Additionally, mild conditions are used across all synthesis and modification steps, making bioinspired silica a promising target for the scale-up and commercialization as both a bare material and active support medium.

The synthesis is shown to be highly sensitive to conditions, i.e., the neutralization rate and final synthesis pH, however tight control over these parameters is demonstrated through the use of auto titration methods, leading to high reproducibility in reaction progression pathway and yield.

Therefore, bioinspired silica is an excellent active material support choice, showing versatility towards many current applications, not limited to those demonstrated here, and potency in future applications.

[Access here](https://dx.doi.org/10.3791/57730)

### Recommended citation: J. R. H. Manning, E. Routoula, and S. V. Patwardhan, “Preparation of Functional Silica Using a Bioinspired Method,” _J. Vis. Exp._, 2018 (**138**), 1
